---
layout: post
title: "Problem #2: Infinite valleys and the limited principle of omniscience"
---

*[Problem #2 Template](https://github.com/Coq-Math-Problems/Problems/blob/master/P2/P2_template.v)*

In [problem 1](https://coq-math-problems.github.io/Problem1/) we saw that arbitrarily large `n`-valleys could be found in a decreasing function `f : nat -> nat`.  However, it was also mentioned that we wouldn't be able to prove the infinite analog (i.e., `f` is eventually constant) without using classical reasoning.  The purpose of this problem will be to (in some sense) demonstrate this.

**Limited Principle of Omniscience**

The [limited principle of omniscience](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limited_principle_of_omniscience) (LPO) says every binary sequence is either `0` everywhere or `1` somewhere.  The LPO is obviously true classically, but is not constructive.  Informally, we see that when trying to decide whether or not a sequence is `1` somewhere, we run into something like the halting problem:  at what point do we give up our search for a `1`?  We may have just run past 10 billions `0`'s, but there's no way we can know that a `1` isn't right around the corner.

**Infinite Valleys**

By an infinite valley, we will mean a point at which a function `f : nat -> nat` is eventually constant.  If we naively search for infinite valley in a given `f`, we see that we run into a similar problem to the one above:  how do we know when to stop looking?  Of course, if `f` is decreasing and hits `0`, we can stop, but it seems like that is the best we can do.

As it turns out, there is more than just a superficial similarity between these two sorts of problems:

**Problem**: Show that the LPO is logically equivalent to the statement that every decreasing `f : nat -> nat` is eventually constant.
